for most of my you know certainly my
teenage years and most of my 20s I was
fairly numb from the neck down like I
was you know I I had emotions but I
didn't have any kind of definition or
Attunement as to what like where they
were or what I was actually feeling and
hug part my journey right and huge part
of it was actually like realizing the
you know the so many different flavors
of Sensation that are alive in the body
and and increasing that capacity has
made the the emotional work just like 50
times
easier hey
Johnny Hey Joe how are you I am great
really good I'm glad to hear it so let's
get started what what the what the [__]
is a nervous system in your in your
world in your
terminology yeah so I I'm I'm also
really interested to hear your kind of
map of this and perspective as well I I
think the the frame that I like to
explore is is the that our nervous
system is like the lens through which we
view
reality and that when we're in different
nervous system States our experience of
other people our experience of ourselves
of the world shifts and being able to
kind of map those States and knowing
with like what our nervous system is
doing at any point in time is incredibly
incredibly helpful um and and I'm yeah
in this conversation I'm super
interested to hear how you think about
the nervous system in in the work you do
and almost like comp the maps that we
have yeah okay I'm happy to share but I
want to dig in a little deeper before I
do the how would you make a distinction
between say the nervous system and the
emotional system and the intellectual
system or the prefrontal cortex or
intellect yeah so I I tend to I tend to
lump the nervous system in with the
emotional system um and a lot of my my
training is informed by um breath work
and poly vagal Theory which I imagine
you've come across which we can get into
if that's if that's relevant um so I I
tend to I tend to see that um there are
certain emotions which are connected
with like safety with what's known as
vental vagal there's certain emotions
which are connected with like dorsal
kind of collapse freeze States and then
there's other other emotions let's say
like frustration or anger which are more
in the sympathetic realm so I kind of
use that as a way of of mapping um
different states okay and so for for the
audience can you give us a brief
overview of the poly vagel
Theory yeah sure so it was developed by
a guy called Dr Steven PGE um he
basically says that there are three main
branches there's the the sympathetic
well the sympathetic branch and the
parasympathetic and then the
parasympathetic which is rest and digest
that has two branches one is known as
ventral and one is known as dorsal and
the ventral is basically like connection
it's like the place where we can play we
feel safe we feel grounded we can make
eye contact we we kind of in tune with
ourselves dorsal is in a kind of low
tone healthy state is rest and digest so
like when we're sleeping when we're
relaxing lying down um but it's
also it's also responsible for like when
we go into freeze or shutdown which is
like a kind of
adaptive um survival response to stress
and some you know some people as as I'm
you know in your work some people when
they get stressed or triggered they go
into either like anger kind of
sympathetic intensity or they go into
like collapse
freeze kind of Shame shutdown and and
like disconnects um so so that's
generally how I think about it and the
sympathetic is um it's also important to
mention that like these States can be
online at the same time so like like
right now I'm probably in some some
degree of sympathetic and some degree of
ventral because there's activation
there's alertness I'm like talking to
you and there's a sense of like oh I can
feel my body I can make eye contact with
you I can feel connected um so these
States can be Blended they're not it's
not just like one on and off switch for
each one and then you mentioned a third
but you didn't name
it so ventral sympathetic and dorsal
vental okay so in the theory ventral and
dorsal aren't part of the the same it's
an actual Third Branch because I believe
that there's some Theory out there about
the social nervous system too right that
part of the Vegas nerve and and so how
does that fit into the so the social
nervous system is another way of saying
the vental vagel which is part of the
part of the Vegas nerve the Vegas break
yeah that's the kind of um ATT tuning
part where when we feel safe and
grounded that can be online for for
connection for
play creativity all those all those
things okay and then what does do a
healthy nervous system look
like
so this is this is a a really
interesting question I think some people
have this view that like we should be
totally regulated and you know calm the
entire time which you know might work
for some people but it's I think it's
certainly setting unrealistic it might
work for some people but I've never seen
anybody do it yeah
neither neither have I um so the two
words that I think are helpful to use
are
capacity and resilience capacity is
basically um I'm able to hold intensity
and and I have a a strong vental vagal
tone meaning that I can be with intense
experiences without going into shutdown
or going into overwhelm yeah um the
other piece is resilience which is
basically your H how efficiently can you
downshift your state of arousal after a
stressful experience and find kind of
healthy relaxation
without relying on substances or
crutches or alcohol whatever it is which
you know a lot of people do so a healthy
nervous system is basically very Dynamic
it responds adaptively to the
situation great and
then one more question for you around
this is that there's a theory I'm trying
to remember the name of the person but
basically it's like I think it's in the
I think it's in some of the emot
literature of loen but may maybe
it's maybe it's the core energetics
there's core Dynamics core energetics I
I always get it all confused but
basically like there's a cycle of
activity and um part of that cycle of
activity is like activation and then
part of the cycle of activity I think
it's like four or five but I always
think about the last two which is so
you're finished with something then
there's a
release and then there's a rest yeah
yeah they're not like releasee and rest
aren't the same thing they're two
different things mhm and so when I hear
you talk about um how quickly you can
get back
to like a rested nervous system in your
in your world is there getting back to
rested nervous system is there a release
and relax in it is it just a relax if so
what's the difference between the two
like to get to that resilience of being
able to get back to a restful
State yeah so I um I think what you're
referring to is the the the activation
or the mobilization response which
typically has the kind of intensity
which is the sympathetic and then like
you say there's usually the release and
then there is the the rest digest which
is where whatever occurred integrates
and actually gets rewi in the nervous
system um and in terms of how that maps
onto poly vagal the the activation is
the sympathetic where it's the intensity
then the the ventril comes online
usually during the release and then it's
actually really important as you say to
have a period you know particularly if
someone's doing like a breath wet
Journey or going through going through
an emotional process that there is that
um complete like deep rest which is
where the actual kind of rewiring in the
from the point of view of the nervous
system takes place and and I believe
there's like roughly a 5H hour window of
neuroplasticity which um if someone is
able to rest deeply after an experience
like that then whatever whatever emerged
will kind of go from a state to a trait
it'll get rewired yeah
what what so just to make it practical
for a second uh somebody has goes into a
meeting and they are activated because
they get called out on
performance and
they go through the activity of the
meeting and let's say it comes out well
they're like oh that was good and
successful in that meeting what does the
release look like what what would a
variety of releases look like and what
would the rest look like in a healthy
nervous system yeah so
um so what what I could imagine
happening is let's say in the in the
boardroom or in the meeting they're
unable to like you know fully come into
contact but as they walk out they
realize oh I'm I'm realizing there's
actually a lot of like in my system so
let's say they um they go home later
that day or or they find some private
space they're able to let that anger
move um and then usually there's a
there's a space where like there's a
feeling of like ah like I feel whatever
the tension is whatever they're
experiencing um shifts and after that
it's it's usually really helpful to have
as much kind of rest or spaciousness as
possible for for that to for that to
integrate great yeah just to say it
reminds me of um I it's like one of the
foremost like bylon like the people who
like cross country ski and shoot or
something like that from Norway or
something like that and he was saying
that like seven hours a day he just sits
and watches television not not the best
way to rest but that resting was such an
important part of him being a gold
medalist like he said so underrated like
I I do really intense workouts but I do
a tremendous amount of resting so that I
can be at top performance and I think
that a lot of people uh underestimate
that same capacity in doing any kind of
self- transformation how important the
rest and not doing is and something that
I Noti is when somebody's like uh
critical voice in their head is
constantly they never get the
rest so integration is hard
it's like often times when people change
the relationship with a negative voice
in their head their transformation
happens quickly and I think a or a lot
quicker and I I noticed that a lot of
that happens because they're actually
getting
rested they're not under attack all the
time there's a phrase that Kevin Kelly
says where he he shares that most people
think about having a good work ethic but
very few people try and cultivate a good
rest ethic and that that's honestly like
that's one of the main pieces in the the
work that I do with nervous system
Mastery is helping people to um
strengthen that like vental vagal tone
which is basically capacity for rest
it's like H like how able are we to find
safety and and actually relax without
needing substances um so practices like
Yoga Nidra um nsdr breathing practices
are super helpful for kind of retraining
that that ability to find relaxation and
and what's interesting is the voice in
the head will often like if you change
the the body if you change the
physiology with a kind of a bottomup
approach the the thoughts spiraling tend
to kind of diminish naturally um is
that's that's what I've noticed yeah I
notice it works both ways actually like
you can directly address the voice in
the head and then it creates more
relaxation or you can use the breath as
I think somebody said you can't control
your emotions but you can control your
breath which controls your emotions and
I'm not a huge fan of controlling
emotions but I am a huge because I think
that that goes down a very dark deep
Rabbit Hole of misery however I think
creating
a a fertile soil of healthy emotions is
a really important thing which is where
I would put the I I would put the breath
work or the yoga or like how do you like
what I would say is can I create a soil
for a healthy lifestyle style is a
really important piece as soon as that
turns to I'm going to control my
emotions with breath then it can be very
destructive then it can be like very up
and out and very
um uh like uh overriding and denial a
whole bunch of other stuff can happen
there yeah so so I actually have a
question for you around that
um where where do you view the line
between let's say someone is is like
experiencing a lot of anxiety like what
is the line between beginning with kind
of like some kind of self-regulation to
allow them to feel grounded enough to
kind of even feel their experience and
be with themselves versus you can
obviously take that too far and someone
um they just use you know let's say a
breathing practice to just calm down but
then ignore the underlying emotion
because I feel like there's risks in
both like what one side someone could
just like get overwhelmed shut down and
then that's not helpful but then like
you say you if someone's always using a
breathing practice to calm themselves
down when they're feeling an emotion
they're likely never going to be able to
experience the the beauty of that
emotion so how do you think about
guiding people through that yeah so I
would add the intellect on it which
you've already actually said which is
like oh the the negative voice in the
head is going to reduce if you're doing
the breath work so there like on one
level you have three systems on another
level it's one system it's us right so
but I think it's a distinct a good
distinction to break them into the three
um and as anybody who's listen to my
podcast knows like to me the prefrontal
cortex is the very human it's the very
rational it's the thought- centered area
the emotion is the mamelon part of the
brain and then the nervous system is the
part of the brain that's more reptilian
it is that immediate reaction area and
it's a lot of that is in that fight
andlight area and so and so anything
that happens in any of them can affect
all of them right so so to me it's all
you're you're addressing all three and
so I'll take access points wherever I
can get them with somebody right so if
the breath thing works to get enough
access to the other two components I'll
take it but I'll make sure that the work
is done on all three levels as much as
possible so all of our courses are
thinking about it in all three levels in
general most people in society are far
more head oriented so if you can
crack open the
intellectual trap that they put
themselves in that's often the first
step for people because that allows them
to be able to pay attention to their
emotion Andor their nervous system what
I notice is unless they're fully
committed unless for some reason or
another they're like okay I have breath
work is there I need to do breath work
and I have the kind of intellectual
structure that allows me to have a
disciplined approach to something which
is not a huge amount of Americans
anyways then I would rather work on the
intellect deconstruct that enough uh
deconstruct the stories enough for them
to be able to start finding the
enjoyment in the breath work and then
they'll do it naturally or the enjoyment
of the emotions and then they'll do that
naturally um but usually the intellect
doesn't have enough space for
it however there's definitely times I'm
working with people where it's like the
emotion has to be addressed first or the
n nervous system has to be addressed
first so if I see somebody who's very
what I would call hysteric not in a bad
word not hysterical but it just that
terminology is from the reikan and Loan
work um if I see somebody in that
hysteric then that nervous system work
is going to be really really critical
for them so they're the people who are
kind of in a society they seem a little
more flighty they seem like they like
are interacting with like crystals and
energy more like typically they're like
their emotions typically are bigger
they're like that kind of human being
than uh nervous system work is a really
good important part first step for them
because they'll Fe they have such a
they're so in touch with it that they'll
feel that breath and
immediately react and know oh this is a
good thing that I can enjoy and
do so it's it's kind of it's more person
byerson situation and in general the
idea is to give them all three tools and
and allow them to work on all three
tools instead of just doing one and I
think that's generally the issue with
most work out there is that they're
working on one or maybe two of the of
the places and so really effective for
some people but there's a missing
component for
others so that makes sense yeah and at
some point I think you know I I view it
so I had a teacher I can't remember who
it was um say that they thought
development was like um a whole a bunch
of pencils with rubber
bands and you could like pull one of the
pencils up but there was like the
tension of the other ones and so on one
level you pull one pencil up and then
everything else wants to come up but if
it's down there's this tension and so
the there's a certain way in which
development worked where you had to kind
of work on all the
pencils so that it was there wasn't
creating this tension between them and
so I notice like if I'm working with
somebody who's done a tremendous amount
of intellectual work or a tremendous
amount of emotional and emotional work
than the nervous system work when they
find it it just makes huge difference
really really
quickly right because that there's that
tension has been built they've got some
really tense rubber bands and all of a
sudden like it can make a huge
difference because it up levels
everything and and how do you
distinguish between the nervous system
work and the emotional work like what's
that what's that line for you yeah so
the way I think about it is it's like a
bit of causation like when you said
oh I'm I'm not great at the terminology
you're using I apologize I did read the
the theory book like while ago it's it's
it's an older book right it's like I
think it's at least a decade old or
something several yeah yeah um yeah it
was given to me by a
a really amazing cranial sacal
practitioner just a mindblowing one
you'd sit and you just walk out of there
just completely shifted and so he he was
the one that gave me the book and
um and and his work was so effective I
had to read it but it you know it's been
so long um but basically you were
talking about
how the
um uh one of those things could have two
different emotional outputs right like
the way I'd say it is like you could do
freeze or fight or flight like depending
for me those are three different and
because there's three different
emotional reactions to that instead of
just one emotional reaction to that
that's how I kind of layer the cause and
effect so for instance and and if you
think about how they're built on top of
each other it's like the nervous system
is kind of the the primary quickest
reaction and you know that from the
studies that
of like people can react without ever
going into the intellect whatsoever like
just have a snake jump at you and you
know what your nervous system is because
you'll be halfway across the room before
you even realize there was a snake and
so um so to me it's like a cause and
effect chain so for instance I could
have the
thought um my boss loves me and I could
have um M lots and lots of emotional
reaction there could be like a plethora
of emotional reactions to that and so to
me the the primary level is the nervous
system the secondary level is the
emotional system and the third is the
intellect however the dance goes both
ways meaning I can have like every time
a certain thought hits my brain a
certain emotion is going to come up and
it can go every time I have a certain
emotion I I go oh that that and I tie it
to a thought so both of them can come up
like I'll you'll see people get a little
agitated because they haven't had enough
food and then they'll start a fight and
everything will start looking binary in
their world right it's just
like so um but the way I would look at
it is generally uh if I was to say what
the nervous system was I'd say the
nervous system is the is is close to
like fight or flight AS fight flight or
freeze as you can get and then the
emotional level is on on a a muscular
level so it's it's it's like you hold
the emotions in the
muscles and then the and then the
intellect is the world of
thoughts and they all they're all
dancing with each other yeah yep yeah
that that that reminds me of an
experience I had when during a
Meditation Retreat where I could almost
I was still enough that I could notice
when a certain looping thought would
arise there was a corresponding tension
in my body and kind of really mapping
that connection and seeing those those
things co-arising was was fascinating
and I think that was another piece that
I wanted to mention in this conversation
is the the idea of interception and like
and building this sematic awareness
because for most of my know certainly my
teenage years and most of my 20s I was
fairly numb from the neck down like I
was you know I I had emotions but I
didn't have any kind of definition or
Attunement as to what like where they
were or what I was actually feeling and
huge part of my journey right and huge
part of it was actually like realizing
the you know so many different flavors
of Sensation that are alive in the body
and and increasing that capacity has
made the the emotional work just like 50
times easier because for me at least if
I'm feeling something I like I may pay
attention to the story but more often
than not and I see you in the in the
live coaching like you will often you'll
see when they go into the head and then
you're like okay bring bring it back
down into the body what's the sensation
and that's at least in my experience
usually what enables it to move by
actually feeling this the interceptive
sensations that are associated with
whatever the emotion
is yeah yeah yeah for me there's kind of
a a phase depending on where you are
with the emotional work there's
the um there's the identification piece
to be able to identify it is really
useful and then to be able to feel have
the sematic experiencing of it is
another really important piece to be
able to express it is another to
actually have the movement and the
expression of it is another really
important piece and then to see that it
is not particularly cause and effect
related is another really important
piece like that like you were saying
something to the effect of I realized
every time I had a thought I had a
corresponding sematic re
experience what I've also noticed is
that's true and then that thought
leaves and then a replacement thought
comes in and then creates that
experience so for instance I had a
relationship with my father that for a
long time every time I thought about my
dad I had the sematic experience of like
oh I'm not getting enough of his love
somatically right and I stopped living
with my dad and that got replaced with
money oh I'm not getting enough money
and the same sematic experience occurred
so there's this yeah um it's just
anyways a really cool relationship
between that so that it's it is like a
a dance between the three for me for
sure yeah um I have another question
this is a question I've never gotten a
good answer from from anybody so no no
and I don't have a good answer for it
either yeah exactly
[Music]
and and I think I think it's you know if
I look at just even the research on it
for instance it's
like the intellectual cognitive
development has like so much
work so much like research behind it and
then the emotional stuff is far thinner
it's starting to get popular now but the
emotional stuff is far thinner the
nervous system is pretty thin the very
worst is the energetic system so what is
in your mind if you can create a
distinction between like
energetic and a nervous system if there
is one what what's the distinction for
you between an energetic system and a
nervous system yeah wow that is a that
is a tough question um right my so it
experientially I'll say that I I only
even became aware that the the energetic
system was a thing during the breath
work training where it became obvious
that by moving breath or breathing in
certain ways there was more aliveness
sensation um in certain parts of my body
and the more that I meditated and the
more that I did the breath the more that
that even became a thing and and so I I
think I'll preface this by saying like
for most people they might not even know
what feeling the energetic system might
be like um my so I actually listened to
a really interesting podcast recently
with a guy called Dr Jack Cruz and he
he's a very kind of contrarian type
figure but he talked about this this
theory that our our cells on
mitochondria actually produce light
they're kind of like light factories
and that it is in theory possible and I
think this has been done in in non-human
cells to measure the very low bandwidth
of light that is created by these cells
and so like the working theory that I
have and I have absolutely zero proof of
this is that when cells are healthy they
are kind of releasing this low bandwidth
of light and um that when we have um
Trapped In Motion trauma incomplete
reflexes from from childhood that that
in some ways reduces that area's
capacity to produce produce light
produce energy and that by going through
these sematic releases these these
processes we're kind of um rejuvenating
the cells in that way um in terms of
defining the Energy System I mean
without kind of going to Chinese
medicine or any some of the more like
esoteric literature I I don't think that
modern science has a a compelling
definition which is largely why it's
it's mostly ignored right there's
there's very little you know most most
people get laughed out the room if they
start talking about the energy body in a
in a neuroscientific way yeah it's
amazing that so to me I think I when I
like look at anything like if someone's
talking about science or emotion or
dreams or energy work or like they have
a a language that makes sense to them
but it doesn't really make sense to
potentially other people who are
speaking other languages and so you can
look at something like the energy body
and like you said there's no not a
really great definition but you can see
scientific research about
how ayurvedic medicine traditional
Tibetan medicine or traditional Chinese
medicine has really good results and
things like ulcers so there's a system
that's completely based on the energetic
body that has really good results but we
still don't particularly have an an an a
definition or know how to work with
energy and it is like the only thing
that I can do in a session that would
like turn more people off than like um
you know like let's talk about your
chakras um is to be like let's talk
about God and how like
Jesus Jesus's wisdom there it's one of
those things that creates uh that those
particular languages create so much
defense in the system and I and I think
for good reason frankly I think that
there been a lot of attack a lot of
people have been attacked through the
language of religion and a lot of people
have been attacked through the language
of energy right it's like this you just
have bad energy so I can't be around you
and it's like what the [__] do I do with
that like you know what I mean it's like
this thing that's undefined that
somebody apparently understands that you
don't understand that you're being
condemned judge for and you can't
there's no way to protect yourself and
so I I feel like there's good reason why
why why um people get really defensive
around that languaging y yep yeah and
and I think there's a couple of like the
other two interesting directions that
are I think like pointing to this um
both the research with with heart math
where they'll kind of um they will
measure the I believe it's the
electromagnetic resonant of the
heart you you can kind of track people's
heart rate variability will in when
they're singing together or or dog
owners and their dogs their HRV will
also in Trin when they're in kind of
sympathetic resonance with each other
and I think that is one way in which it
you know it is measurable through kind
of like charts you can see where these
numbers become aligned so I think that's
that's one way and then the other is
that during these kind of um let's say
practices like using breath work as an
example that create these Altered States
of consciousness there are both kind of
certain brain wave States and also
changes in the blood chemistry which can
be measured quite easily which correlate
with these kind of energetic experiences
that people report and so I think that
there's almost like adjacent things that
we can measure and quantify which like
point to the something point to a there
being there um and we're you know
several years maybe decades away from
being able to actually like take a photo
of it or or measure it in a in a
meaningful way as as far as I'm aware
yeah I mean the amazing thing is that as
the
one like so for instance like you do
certain breath work then your nitrogen
level and your blood goes up it has a
certain
experience like you can feel like your
body tingle you can call that an
energetic state or you can call that a
like increased nitrogen in my blood
right and so on one level it's like
the energetic system or the people
trying to describe the energetic system
it's like to me it's like they are
describing something that's happening
potentially happening
scientifically but when science defines
it they're not going to Define it as
energetic they're going to Define it as
and that's the thing that I think
happens in all of the areas is that like
because we're one system this like
language is learning to describe the
whole system the intellect describes a
part of the system a lot better than the
energetic system system the energetic
system but as will describe something a
lot better than the intellectual system
but over time like you can see that
they're pointing often to very similar
things with different language yeah yeah
I totally agree and and I think you're
also right that like the art of of I
guess the work that we do is kind of
finding the languaging that resonates
with the person like if they're doing a
yoga teachy training the energy stuff
might resonate and if they're exactly
leading a company it's probably going to
be more on the intellect or the the the
sematic realm that's right that's right
so um tell me how so you've been pretty
dedicated to this nervous system path
for how
long um I'd say kind of three to five
years depending on how you define it
great but we we'll Define it as five
years and what what's the what's the
changes what what what has
shifted what has shifted for me yeah wow
um well I'd say that like I have a
background in I was a startup founder 11
12 years ago um I went through a burnout
experience and and then six and a half
years ago I I lost my fiance um she had
an anxiety attack and ended up taking
her own life and that that kind of
Journey Through grief really like
completely opened me up to to like my
entire emotional experience and and I
realized how numb I'd basically been for
um the last five five to 10 years
and yeah and in the process of
discovering meditation breath work and
then more recently how the nervous
system kind of ties those together um I
mean I feel like a completely different
human I think my my life has has changed
fundamentally and and I actually find it
in some ways difficult to relate to
myself um you know 10 15 years ago um
but tangible pieces are like the quality
of connection in relationships is beyond
anything that I I think even
comprehended when I was younger um I
think that's been a huge piece the the
amount the capacity for joy and honestly
love as well um and and and and the kind
of the way in which I think um my body
is constantly giving me feedback about
any moment or experience and as you guys
teach with you know decision making and
like I used to be the guy that made a
spreadsheet with like ranking things
with like one to 10 and like weighted
variables and just you know really like
doubling down on on the the intellect
for everything and um now I just move
through the world in a in a very
different way and I think another piece
as well is um confidence in my capacity
in new situations like before I think if
I was
triggered I would like especially in
social situations I'd shut down and I'd
feel very kind of like almost like a
victim of my own body in in ways and now
having both kind of toolkits to
downregulate if needed or even better
just like feel the thing in the moment
and then and then move through um that's
that's been life-changing as well so I
mean there's so many there's so many
areas that my life has shifted and I'd
say also the doing somewhere between 150
to 200 breath work Journeys um with this
this uh this guy in barley his name's Ed
Dangerfield kind of coming into
relationship and learning to love as you
guys teach like loving these different
emotions that previously I'd I disowned
I think initially for me it was grief
and then anger and then shame and then
helplessness and I can kind of track my
journey to exploring those emotions in a
sematic way and learning to welcome them
more
fully and and how how has been your
journey of teaching it to
others what what what has been the like
for those who are who don't know Johnny
has a nervous system Mastery class and
I'm and my question is like what has
that been how has your per how have you
personally Changed by that in that
process
I would say an a number of ways um
one I I feel like I've kind of found
work that I truly love in that it feels
like the intersection between
communicating complex kind of scientific
ideas in ways that land and resonate
with people
um sharing some of my own story and kind
of what has been important in my life
and seeing the impact that that's had on
other people um and feeling the kind of
I guess like satisfaction and joy of
other people having meaningful
breakthroughs and experiences in their
life that's been immensely rewarding um
and it's also been like as with I think
any business or work it's been its own
Arena of challenges particularly in the
early days like I remember the first
time I I did a workshop for like 100
people online and I I was in I was in
Mexico at the time and uh the town had
power Cuts every like like once a week
and there was a power cut that that had
and there were like like a h 100 people
on a zoom call and some of them were
like CEOs and leaders and stuff and I
like raced down to my friend's house to
get this like backup generator and just
like ran back and managed to get the
power back on but like I was in a state
I was just like I was just like so um
like expanding my capacity let's say uh
yeah in in that experience and and now
yeah I think now I feel much more
comfortable leading groups of that size
and much more I'd say if if I had kind
of pin it down to one thing there's more
trust in in life and more trust in
myself to show up in a way that um yeah
that that where things work out and
flow one of the things that I really
appreciate about you as a teacher that I
don't see with a lot of teachers um is
is that
you you're transparent about your
learning
process so you're not like when I see
you on Twitter or when I see you out in
the world you're you're I would say
you're far more interested in learning
than
teaching if I just if I just look at the
time spent maybe it's because in the
situations I see you but even on Twitter
I see you more interested in learning
almost than teaching and and also very
much happy to share what you're
learning even if it's not a part of your
teaching yeah yeah and so I'm just which
is rare for teachers a lot of times
teachers get caught in the kind of the
knowing aspect of things and and not in
the like learning aspect of things and I
think and I think there's at some point
also a natural tendency that happens
after years of doing something
that you have to be really specific
about who you learn from right so like
everybody wants to teach
you that's that that cannot always be a
useful or fruitful thing so yeah I'm
just wondering like so the question
behind that
is is that natural was that a learning
is there a been a bit of a a dance with
that what what's been your experience
and journey with with the being a
learner and being a teacher and and
finding that
balance yeah it is a it's a really great
question
um I think the the honest answer is is I
love learning and very selfishly I think
part of the reason that I'm I'm doing
what I doing do doing what I'm doing is
that it's a fantastic excuse to continue
learning like it gives me a platform to
invite people like yourself and other um
genuine Specialists and experts in other
fields that I can then learn in real
time with them in front of a big group
of people and so I I kind of view both
the podcast that I have and the course
as like a a forcing function to continue
my own learning
um I think that there's certainly a
point where um like you can kind of or
or I can gain a certain level of like I
feel like this topic makes sense to me
now and then for me it's like okay
what's the next what's the next
experiment what's the next thing I want
to really learn about and go deep in and
you know recently I've been fascinated
in neurode Divergence and there's a
number of students that come in with
ADHD with with different um a
constellation of different symptoms and
I find it fascinating talking to them
figuring out like how their experience
maps on to what I know and um yeah I
honestly I just like I I would hate to
One Day become like an expert and and
stop learning like that actually
terrifies me a little
bit and and and I think something that I
heard on your podcast you guys were
speaking about this about how that kind
of teacher student Dynamic can create
disconnection in a way yes um and whilst
I think it's it's obviously important to
present with a level of professionalism
and expertise the more that I am able to
like view my students as people that I
learned from as well the the less that
disconnection
happens yeah yeah
yeah um you spoke a little bit about the
breath work you did you said I did you
kind of offhandedly said I did x amount
of Journeys and um breath Journeys can
be a whole I mean my I
think I think you know this I did breath
work like every week if not every other
week depending on my travel schedule for
like seven years like hourlong sessions
so and I did this didn't know that much
yeah so um pre you know it was it was
one of the she's past dead but she was
one of the last and in her she told me I
couldn't find anything that said any
different was that she was the last
person who was doing kind of the pure
Reich breath work that hadn't taken the
Reich breath work and like modified it
right I think a lot of the modifications
that have been done to it like Len's
work I think is great so so I'm not
suggesting that it was better by any
stretch but um but but I've also done a
whole bunch of other kind of breath work
in my life
like coherent breathing and and all
sorts of I I have a book this big of
like an Indian breath work person and
I'll I'll like literally that my friend
gave me and I'll just like open it up
I'll be like let's try that for a bit
and I'll try it and see what it does to
my system um so what do you mean by
breath work Journeys and and what what's
what what's the result in your mind like
what's that not the result but what's
the experience like for one of your
breath work Journeys
yeah sure um well I think it's helpful
to categorize breath work into like
there's many categories but the two main
ones in my mind are like the kind of
real time shifting like either
upshifting or downshifting your state so
something like um triangular breathing
or humming will calm people down or if
you do like Breath of Fire kapalabhati
whm Hof hyperventilation that will amp
people up and you'll feel more alert um
so that's can we just stop for a second
can we just stop for a second so
everybody listening just big deep breath
in that's what he's talking about as far
as like a breath to regulate a state
your state is different after a single
deep breath in I just want to I want I
want I love that visceral experience not
just the the explanation okay yeah it's
great and and and you can um I mean we
we could we could do like another full
breath and then humming on the exhale
also releases nitric oxide and that's
one of the one of the most effective
ways of downshifting is just like a long
hum all the way to the end of your
breath and again you'll you'll feel so
much so much different after just one or
two
hums want to do it yeah let's do it
okay we'll do one just because we don't
want it to be too Point yeah get comfy
so full breath in through the nose
inhale and then humming through the nose
m
[Music]
[__] that it feels too good let's do
[Laughter]
another the rest of the podcast will
just be showing Johnny huning for 20
minutes felt good to
us
yeah it has that same thing with the
that's like the the UI breath has that
same thing where it like you can feel it
like toning the the the Vegas nerve ve
whatever not good with words but yeah
the the nerve you can the constriction
that the hum causes also creates like a
vibration in that nerve Corridor that's
cool I've never done that one yeah no
it's it's great um I did it this morning
the C tub as I was like trying to find
my breath um anyhow so so that's one
category and the other category is has
many names but like transformational
breathing is is the general category and
that includes like holotropic reichan
conscious connected breathing rebirthing
there there's there's all different
types of names um the particular branch
that I trained under was called
facilitated breath repatterning which is
a form of conscious connected breathing
but the practitioner will um basically
read the breath during a journey and
make certain adjustments certain verbal
cues nerve flossing different things to
um both create more ease in the exhale
and sometimes more activation and energy
on the inhale
and generally speaking um once someone
kind of drops into this circular
breathing pattern the the journeys go
from anywhere between an hour to two
hours and and once someone's kind of
dropped into the breath these incomplete
reflexes or like stored emotions will
tend to kind of rise to the surface
and for me it's it was almost like
layers of an onion like one one thing
would come I would move Express whatever
the thing needed to be felt would feel
and then there was a a brief integration
and then the next piece would come up
and it was just like so many different
things would would would arise um and
for me it's it's always like I don't
recommend that people do this online
because I think there's a huge amount to
be gained from having an in-person
facilitator like really out of safety
reasons um such that if something big
arises they can be there to help
co-regulate and help you ground totally
agree yeah we do our version of breath
work and but we'll only do it in our
inperson stuff yeah yeah I I think it's
it's really important and and and also
having a high facilitated to breather
ratio as well um in in the the place
that I trained it's it's 1 to
four we do we do 1 to three one to four
yeah I totally agree with you gotta have
it yeah because you know I've seen
people go comos I've seen people have
like massive trauma response I've seen
I've seen so much puking so much stuff
happens in those rooms you really
completely that high and it's not that
you know I know there's people out there
that do you know breath works like
crowds of like two or 300 people and it
will work in the sense that like big
emotions can arise but what we talked
about earlier with that mobilization
kind of cycle it's it's much harder for
people especially if they don't have
that kind of um down regulation capacity
to to feel through and to find the the
the ease and calm and integration on the
other side so I've I've known people
that have done some of these holotropic
let's say and then they've been in this
kind of semi- triggered State for the
next like several weeks or even months
and they found it really hard to to
downshift so yeah I worked with somebody
who did um some version of a breath work
journey and didn't sleep for [__] a
decade wellow yeah no no doubt there is
like and I would I would I would offer
that it there's one not knowing how to
downregulate is part of it but there's
also that's the or a trauma gets
released and they don't know how to
actually integrate the trauma is another
potential thing but the and so so
there's a retraumatization that happens
and but there's another too which is
like you brought all this stuff up but
you didn't heal it so maybe it doesn't
re-traumatize but like great you had the
experience and I've seen this with like
with both some drugs that'll do or
medicines that'll do the same thing and
breath work where they get these big
States they get these big but there's no
integration of it so you're not actually
seeing transformation of a person over
time like I did another iasa journey and
I had this other big experience but like
the way you're living your
relationship your friends like the your
level of connection your level of
emotional fluidity none your thought
patterns aren't particularly
changing um same I've seen the same
thing with breath work where someone's
doing breath work that doesn't have the
integration care afterwards where they
they're having big experiences but
they're not actually integrating into
transformation or development yeah
absolutely and um one interesting piece
that I love about breath work in
particular is that when you're if you're
breathing someone especially in a
one-on-one capacity you can you can see
the changes in their breath kind of
before and after and you can tell has
that has that thing landed has it been
integrated by the way that they're
breathing and you know if they come if
they come for another session the next
day or the next week then it's like you
can see if that
actually landed in their system whereas
with a lot of other modalities you know
particularly psychedelics things like
that it's very difficult to know like
was the actually a meaningful shift or
was it just a big cathartic release that
didn't have any like you know lasting
impact on on them as a human on yeah so
I know that at one point I was was Su
was suggesting that you might do some
live iners ones has that happened or do
you have plans for it in the future
yeah I've been doing um one-on-one
sessions with people here in Boulder um
oh great mostly mostly friends and also
the odd kind of client as well um which
it's kind of a good mix because I I do
really miss that the inperson live
interaction that I know you get with
with groundbreakers um yeah which has
felt like a good good balance for me a
that's great fantastic glad to hear it
yeah I mean that absolutely changed my
whole world that the seven years that I
did I mean it changed the way that I had
an orgasm it changed the way I laughed
it changed the like my capacity to my
resilience my stress level it changed so
much my armoring physical musculature
armoring it it had a huge impact that
seven years a lot of the impact happened
in the first little bit because I was
very ripe and then there was just like
something that happened like over time
that there was an eroding and a wearing
away that happened happened over time
that was really
useful yeah it's interesting you
mentioned laugh like my both my laugh
and my voice have changed even I I
listened to a podcast episode I did four
years ago and my voice sounds noticeably
different then compared to how it sounds
now and I think a lot of that is because
the the tension in my lower belly and
lower diaphragm has a lot of it's kind
of been
released and so when you're doing your
breath work I I could geek out like
inhale exhale body position like I could
completely geek out but I I would it
would bore the crap out of everybody but
at some point I'd love to chat with you
about it but yeah I'm just curious when
you're doing the inperson breath work
and you're watching somebody breathe are
you making adjustments in any way to
help them deepen into their breaths or
is it like it is it an interactive thing
or is it a like a prescription thing no
it's constant real- time adjustments so
there's hands on the body usually most
of the time um and generally what what
we're looking for is both seeing like
what is someone's window of Tolerance
what is their capacity and keeping them
within that window yeahum and then
titrating or pendula is another term the
breath to either increase more energy
usually by like deepening the inhale
sometimes getting like hands under the
rib cage and allowing more more air to
go into the upper lungs or more often
than not especially with kind of type a
high Achievers it's helping them find
ease in the exhale so often people will
have like holding in their throat
oh wow it's really similar it's really
similar to the work that I do I'm sorry
to interrupt yeah all it's all for me
it's the same thing it's the most full
breath inward capacity breath like a
stretching like how do you increase the
both in the belly and the chest and
other places but like and how do you
release with no effort exactly EXA okay
so it's really actually really similar
fascinating and and and then finding out
what are all of the blocks and tension
to either a full
kind of vibrant inhale or a relaxed
effess exhale that's right us usually
starting around the rib cage and then
kind of working up or down depending on
and and also you know bearing in mind
how many sessions is someone going to do
and do you want to open up a big piece
knowing that you'll have three or four
or five sessions afterwards to help
integrate it if something big arises
well I I could geek out after we turn I
I want
to be real um I mean as in I be real not
as in the media social media thing um I
think I don't know if we have much more
time for another question how are we
doing I can't read time oh yeah we're
done
okay I have to go to another podcast so
it was a total pleasure to have you is
there um anything that you want to leave
uh our audience with any any thought
process any good wishes or tell them
about anything you're
doing yeah um well with like thanks so
much this has been so fun um I would so
I I have a podcast as well called
curious humans podcast um you've been
you've been a guest um if you enjoy this
conversation there's a chance that might
resonate too and yeah and if people want
to learn more about the nervous system
Mastery course that's uh we have a
spring c-walk coming up in mid-march and
the website is nsasy tocom um and
there's I I love seeing how much overlap
there is between our two communities
there there's a bunch of people joining
that have Tak a away and I know vice
versa so it's it's really cool to see
that see see that overlap very sweet
yeah pleasure pleasure to have you on
Johnny yeah you tojay yeah pleasure all
right see you soon